In the previous lecture, we looked at operations
on search trees. We claim that these were
efficient that we could maintain balance.
So, let us see how we can keep search tress
balanced.
So, recall that we are looking at these 7
operations, we want to able to search for
a value, we want be able to insert and delete
values, we also want to be able to compute
the minimum and the maximum value in a tree
and also find the predecessors and successor
of the given value and all of these we claimed
would be order log n provided the tree is
balanced.
So, thus because all of the operations as
we implemented them, we will walk up and down
a single path and so the worst case would
be the height of the tree and in our balanced
tree the height will always be logarithmic
in the size of the tree. So, today’s this
lecture the goal is to explain, how to maintain
the balance as the tree grows and shrinks.
So, trees there are many different notions
of balance in a tree, so essentially a balance
we should think of it is like a physical balance.
So, if you go to an old style vegetable seller,
when they will have this kind of a balance
and then you want at any point if you hold
up a tree by it is root, the two side should
be balanced, they should be equal. So, the
most direct notion of balance is that the
two are exactly that is the number of nodes
at the left is equal to the number of nodes
in a right for every node.
Then, it is easy to see that you when you
get a complete binary trees, so example you
could have a tree which has this structure
or if you extend it one more level, then for
every node in the left you must extended on
the right, but then these must also be balanced,
so you must definitely complete this. So,
you can have a tree up to 3 levels which is
completely filled or up to 4 levels and so
on. So, if you want this exact size balance,
then it is very restricted.
So, you might have a little bit more flexibility,
you might say there we do not want to be exactly
equal, we may be wanted it to be at most one
off, then you could have structures for instants
like this, where you have only a left or you
have at this point a left and right but you
have only array. These standards structures,
now which are not complete binary trees become
balanced in this notion. So, this allows us
more flexibility and we can get more trees
this way, but it is difficult to maintain
this property incrementally as we do inserts
and deletes. So, we will go for different
notion of balance.
Notion of balance that we will use is not
with respect to size, but with respect to
height. So, we will say that the height is
a number of nodes from the root to a leaf.
For example, if I have a tree which looks
like this, then here the height is 1, 2, 3,
4 because on this path we have 4 nodes. So,
the heights become 4 it is a length of the
longest path measured in terms of nodes, the
reason we measured in terms of nodes is, then
we can distinguish easily, the empty tree
from the tree with only a root.
If you measured in terms of edges, the tree
with only a root will have height 0, because
there are no edges and so would be the empty
tree. Whereas, if we measure it in terms of
nodes, then the empty tree has height 0 and
the tree with only the root has height 1.
So, we can distinguish these two. And now
in keeping with our earlier relaxation of
the size condition, the height balance tree
will be one where the height of the left and
the height of the right differ the at most
1.
Now, this is more relaxed in the previous
thing. For example, now of course, I could
start with a height balance tree like this.
And then, I could now connect this to form
a height balance tree like this and now this
which is a height 3 tree I can connect with
a height 2 tree and form a height balance
tree which looks like this. So, the height
of the left sub tree is 3, height of the right
sub tree is 2 in this recursively the height
of left sub tree is 2, the height of the right
is sub tree is 1 and so on.
So, we could have things which look quit difference,
so size here for instant size is 4 and size
is 2. But, nevertheless you can kind of compute
that the size even in this case will be exponential
in the height or rather the height will be
logarithmic in the size. So, these trees are
called AVL trees the named after the two people
who independently invented them one person
called Adelson-Velsky and independently Landis.
So, an AVL tree is a height balanced tree
which says that at every node the height of
the left and height of the right sub trees
differ by at most 1.
So, let us refer to the difference between
the height as just the slope, so we have a
intuitively in our pictures. So, if it is
unbalance then thing is treated, so we could
have tilt this way or tilt this way, so we
call this the slope. So, we let us say this
slope is height of the left minus height,
so the height of the left is less than the
height of the right, then you have a positive
slope. If the height of the left is bigger
than the height of the right, then you have
right, left is smaller than right you have
negative slope, left is bigger than right
you are positive slope.
So, in a balanced tree since the height difference
absolute value must be 1, you can only have
three possible slopes throughout the tree,
either there is no slope they are exactly
the same or it is minus 1 or plus 1. Now,
if you can argue very easily that if the current
value is of the slope some minus 1 plus 1,
when you delete a node, you can reduce one
of the heights by 1. So, the height difference
can go from 1 to 2 or when you increase you
can make the height difference, again go from
1 to 2.
So, the new slope after a single insert or
a single delete can be at most minus 1 or
plus 2, minus 2 or plus 2. So, what we will
end up to do what we will try to do is that
whenever we do an insert or a delete we will
immediately try to rebalance the tree. So,
we would have a single disturbance from minus
2 or plus 2 it will never become very badly
unbalance and we will immediately restore
the balance to within minus 1 to plus 1.
So, you will do this rebalancing we will also
do this rebalancing bottom up, so what happens
we will be do an insert, if you remember is
that we go down and we find a place to insert.
So, this point we add a new node, so therefore
now at this point there could be some imbalance,
so we fix it, then we will go back to the
up this path and we will go there and we will
fix the path here, but at this point you will
assume that the tree below has been balanced.
So, whenever we rebalance the slope which
is outside the range, you will assume that
the sub trees below that are already balanced,
because this balancing as we will see is going
to be done bottom up.
So, here is a typical situation that we would
reach after a single operation which removes
the balance. So, we might have a node which
has slope plus 2 or minus 2, so let us look
at plus 2 minus 2 turn out be symmetric. So,
we have a node which we call x which has slope
plus 2 and what it means is, it has a left
tree and right tree. Such that, the height
of the left tree is 2 more than the height
of the right tree, remember this slope is
height or left minus height of left, so h
plus 2 minus h will be 2.
Now, recursively we are going to assume that
all the slopes here and here are at most plus
1 or minus 1. So, we are assuming that everything
below this has been fixed and the only in
balance in this sub tree at x is x itself.
So, now since the left has height h plus 2,
it has height at least 2, h can be at most
at least smallest h can be 0, so it has height
at least 2, so there at least 1 node here.
I mean 2 means that there are at least 2 nodes
here, so we have at least 1 node in particular.
So, we will expand this by exposing it is
root and the root will have in general 2 sub
trees, so now this whole thing as height h
plus 2.
So, we will now look at this new node that
we have expected. So, its slope is minus 1
0 or plus 1 and we are going to do some bottom
up rebalancing, we are assuming everything
below it is case. So, I have going to do some
case analysis based on what is the slope of
y.
So, let us first look at the situation where
the slope of y is either 0 or plus 1, so if
it is 0 or plus 1 it means that so remember
this whole thing was h plus 2 of which 1 node
is here, so it is left child must be at least
h plus 1 and because it is slope is 0 or plus
1, the right child is either h plus 1 in case
slope is 0 or it is h incase the slope is
plus 1. So, now this is the current situation
as we have it with an unbalanced node x everything
below is balanced. But we have just come to
a situation where we try to analyze what is
the situation below.
So, x is got a balanced unbalance of plus
2 and below it we have why which whereas assuming
is either 0 or plus 1. So, now we do this
rotation, so we take this tree and we kind
of hang it out by y and we reattach things.
So, in this rotation when you hang it out
by y, x comes down and now we look at this
sub trees, so we have the 3 sub trees, we
have TLL, TLR and TR. So, TR is to the right
of x and it is also to the right of y, so
it is the right of both, TLR is to the left
of x to the right of y, TLL is to left of
y, left of x.
So, if you go there we find that TR is to
the right of both, TLR is to the left of x
right of y and TLL is to the left of both.
So, we hang up these trees, so now all the
values we can verify will be currently organized
as a search tree should. But, now if you look
at the slopes, we have just inherited this
slope some what we knew that the slope of
TLL of h plus 1, TLR is h plus 1 or h and
TR is h.
So, this means that if I look at this over
all height at this point, it is either h plus
1 or at most h plus 2, so this is h plus 2
or h plus 1. If it is h plus 2, then the height
slope at y is minus 1, if it h plus 1 then
both sides at h plus 1 slope at y is 0 and
if you look at x, here we have h plus 1 and
here we have h, so the difference is either
0 or plus 1. So, x is now balanced, y is balanced
and by assumption inductively all the grey
sub trees are balanced. So, by one right rotation,
we have rebalanced the tree.
So, the third situation is that it is not
0 or plus 1, but the slope at y is minus 1.
So, we have already dealt with the case where
0 or plus 1 is the possibility. So, if it
is minus 1 this means that the right sub tree
must be strictly taller than the next left
sub tree. So, with the whole thing remember
again is h plus 2 the high assumption, because
the whole thing has plus 2, so this whole
thing is h plus 2 and this thing is h.
Now, this h plus 2 it now beings split of
y and the rest therefore h plus 1 must be
coming in the right and h 1 the left we got
the slope by assumption we are assuming slope
is minus 1. So, now we are going to expand
out this node now it is a h plus 1, so there
is at least 1 node here even a way which is
0 it has at least a root node. So, we will
expose a root node as we exposed y earlier.
So, now we are kind of expend it this TLR
as z with 2 sub trees TLRL. So, this supposed
to indicate let us started their original
tree go and left go right and go left, so
TLRL go left, go right, go right. So, it is
TLRR, so that is notation for the sub trees,
so this whole thing was h plus 1. So, therefore,
this h plus 1 can come either sides, so either
this is h or h minus 1 or this is h or h minus
1 at least is one of then must be h.
Because, we are both are h minus 1 then the
whole thing cannot be h plus 1. So, at least
1 is h and it is balanced, so I do not know
which way it is, but at least one of these
trees as h I will h the other one could have
h or h minus 1 and it terms out it will not
matter which one. So, now I have a two-step
procedure what I will do is, now I will do
is similar rotation, but to the left involving
these two nodes. So, I will hang up these
sub trees here by z.
So, if I hang up these sub trees then what
happens is that these 3 trees below have to
be a reattached and we reattach some in the
correct with TLL is bit to the left of both
y and z TLRR is to the right of both y and
z and TLRL is to the left of z and to the
right of 1. And now, if you go back and check
all the heights, then you find that at y I
either have height 0 or I have height plus
1. Now, if I look at z then the left hand
side is now h plus 1 and the right hand side
is h or h minus 1.
So, if is h plus 1 and this is the h then
I get plus 1, if it is h plus 1 this h minus
1 I get plus 2. So, in the process now not
only did I have x which was unbalanced and
temporarily created is z which potentially
is unbalance. So, I cannot say for sure it
is unbalance, but it could to a unbalance,
because I do not know which is h and which
is h minus h 1, but this is only in intermediate
steps, so now what I did, so earlier what
we did, we will did on left rotation here.
So, I am going to follow this a by a right
rotation at x.
So, we rotate write a text z goes up x goes
down and now again we hang of the 4 trees
and there is only one way to hang of you can
verify it will go back and check out their
hanging. So, TRR must be bigger than z and
x, TLL must be smaller than y and z and so
on. And now we have a very happy situation
which is that if you look at the slope of
y, then it is the either 0 or it could be
plus 1 because this could be h minus 1.
If you look at x it could be minus 1, because
this could be h minus 1 this definitely h
or we could be 0. But, this whole thing is
definitely h plus 1 because I do have at least
1 sub tree of size h, this whole thing is
again h plus 1, because I have at least 1
sub tree of size h and therefore, the slope
at 0 at z is 0. So, both all three nodes x,
y and z have slopes in the correct range and
therefore, I again I will stored the balance.
So, to summarize this what we have said is
that if we have plus 2, then we look at the
left child of x call it y, if the slope of
y is 0 or 1 we rotate at right at x, if the
slope at y is minus 1 be first rotate this
and then we rotate y. Either case we rotate
at x, but first we rotated y in cases show
to minus 1. Now, it will turn out that if
you have the other side case, the other extreme
where the slope at x is minus 2, then will
have a symmetric picture, so we will have
to expose the right child I will call it y.
So, then the basic basics operation is that
if y has slope minus 1 or 0 its symmetric
remember, then we will do a single left rotation
x. Otherwise, we will first do a right rotation
at y, in case is slope at y is plus 1 and
then we will do a left rotation at x. So,
we one not look at their minus 2 cases in
detail, but it is easy to see that it is symmetric
to the plus 2 case.
So, how do you do these rotations, where will
you can just draw this pictures and figure
at outs. So, you just give names to everything,
so we say that we want to rotate this x down
in the y up, now we have are original t pointing
here remember. So, it is we cannot change
in the node that t is pointing 2, so we remember
the value at t we remember the value here.
So, we need this names x and y to the contents
and then we have this counters pointing to
these three trees TLL, TLR and TR and then
we reconnect that.
So, what we do is we first replace this value
by y, then what we do is we make this node
come to the right and we reset it is value
to x. So, we put an x here and we have moved
it there and then we have hang off below that
top node on the left we put TLL and below
this right new right node on the left if put
TLR on the right would TR. So, you just do
this kind of reconnection is like a you know
un hooking and re hooking trees and just we
just keep track of the all the names. So,
that everything is un hook and re hook correctly.
So, it is a very simple, so you notice that
this the kind of constant set of operation
involving of few of these left and right pointers.
So, it will be regardless of the size of the
tree, it is a very local operation. So, we
can treat this as one constant unit operation.
And a similar thing for the left, we give
names and just we do this updating exactly
has we had done before. So, again these are
constant set of operations which implements
rotate left.
So, now that we have that two rotations, then
what does rebalancing say, rebalancing says
that if I have node which has plus 2, then
I will expose its left child and I will check
it slope, if it is slope is minus 1 then first
I will do a left rotation there and then regardless
I will do a right rotation at the top. And
the symmetric cases, if I have a slope just
minus 2 at the top, then it will have a right
child and then if this as plus 1 when I will
first to a right rotation here and then regardless
I will do a left rotation of the top. So,
rebalancing is these two steps and rotation
this is set up other steps, so basically rebalancing
at a given node is a constant number operations
at that node.
So, now what we do is every time we make a
change in our tree which could affect the
balance of the slope of a node, we do a balance.
So, when we in our earlier code for insert,
when we did a recursive insert in the left
of a tree we rebalance it, similarly we insert
in the right of the tree we rebalance it,
we just introduce this rebalance code and
note is that this a constant operations for
this node. So, you will do this all the way
along the paths. So, this will do a log n
times in constant number operations, so this
would not affect anything in terms of the
asymptotic complexity of our operation it
will be a logarithmic number of constant time
operations for each node.
The same with the delete, where above we do
a recursive delete we rebalance.
And then there was a case where we deleted
the maximum value or the predecessor, so again
we do a rebalance. So, where ever we had are
insert and delete affecting the structure
of the tree we just make sure that we rebalanced
the tree the tree at that point.
So, there is one point we have to be bit careful
about in this thing, so we said that we have
to do all these rebalancing. So, if you go
back to rebalancing, so rebalancing requires
to compute the slope and slope we said was
define to the height of the left minus height
of the right. Now, it is possible to compute
the height on the fly, the height of the tree
is recursively computed, if it is nil it has
height 0; otherwise, you recursively compute
the height of the left in the right and then
accounting for this node you add one to that.
So, you take the maximum of the two sub trees
and add one, but this unfortunately involves
examining every node in the tree. So, this
will be propositional to order of the size
of the tree. So, this will be exponential
operation in some sense depend I mean compare
to the path, so we are try to do log n operation,
this will be a order n operation. So, this
will be killing all our attempts to do something
efficiently, because in order to compute the
height we actually have to see the entire
tree which is not we want to do.
But, we can get around this by just keeping
the current value of the height and updating
it each then. So, we have additional thing,
so we have in our tree node, we currently
had the value, parent, left and right. So,
now we just add one more field called height,
so now whenever we do any rebalancing, then
the height of this tree may change the current
node. So, we just look inductively we assume
that below has the height got set correctly.
So, we look at the two heights which are locally
there add want to the maximum of the two.
Now, this is just looking up one value and
are two neighbors below to two children. So,
this now becomes a constant time operations,
it does not require us to traverse entire
trees. So, as we are rebalancing we readjust
the heights and every time you want to check
to slope we just have to check the value of
the two tree is below us and check that difference
of their heights. Because, that will be given
locally by this height field in the node.
So, we have to be careful not to compute height
recursively, but to store the height as part
of the tree and also update that with every
update.
So, to summarize you can use rotations to
maintain height balanced binary search trees
and then height balance search tree we have
claimed that the height is going to be logarithmic
in the size. And since all our operations
or propositional to the height, because they
all go along and one path, all these operation
namely find, insert, delete, minimum, maximum,
predecessor and successor can all be done
in logarithmic time.